# Game Setup
When a group of persons gather together to play a game of OA, one person acts as a referee and narrator known as a **Game Master (GM)**. The others play the roles of medieval fantasy or science fiction characters and are called **Players**. Each player is in control of an imaginary character known as a **Player Character (PC)**. Other imaginary characters are played by the GM and known as **Non-player Characters (NPCs)**. A group of characters (PCs and/or NPCs) are known as a **Party**.

Each game session is called an **Adventure**. An adventure can last as long as players and the GM decide to play. An adventure may run for hours, or last an entire weekend! The length of playing time depends on the wishes and schedules of the players and GM. Several related adventures played over a series of game sessions are known as a **Campaign**.

It's the GM's responsibility to setup and prepare the setting and scenario for each adventure before actual game play begins. Whether the setting is one of an underground dungeon, space ship, mountain wilderness or alien planet, the area should be carefully mapped on paper (typically graph paper), a game mat, or represented by props acting as a diorama. An adventure, including the surrounding area in which the action and fun take place, may be designed by the game master or pre-created by someone else such as a friend.

The GM must spend more time creating and preparing the adventure before play than the other players. The game master must also have an intimate understanding of the rules of OA. Because of this, it is recommended the most experienced player take up the GM role which requires more forethought and work, but is an extremely rewarding experience.

Players will create player characters before actual game play begins. Following the instructions in [Player Character Creation](#/references/articles/basic/player-creation), players will choose the strengths and weaknesses of their imaginary character.

## Setup & Preparation

When a group gathers together to play OA, everyone should remember to bring with them any supplies or equipment they need such as pencils, dice, paper (both normal and graph) and, if available, character record sheets (character record sheets can be found at the back of this booklet). It is recommended to bring refreshments for yourself and others as games of this nature can last for hours.

Typically a large table is used for the players to sit and gather around. The game master sits on one end of the table with the GMR, adventure maps and all other secrets of the adventure. The game master may wish to use a book, cardboard or other vertical partition to form a privacy screen (known as a "shield") so the players do not see or read the adventure's secrets. The players sit around the table in a position where they can easily see any map being drawn, the marching order of the figurines representing the party members (if used) and so on. To avoid confusion, the table's contents should be kept orderly and free of distracting devices and items.

During the adventure, players with characters that have attained level 1 or higher should be able to refer to this rulebook whenever they wish. Players who are playing for the first time, or who have a character that has not yet reached level 1, are instead encouraged to read the first chapter of this booklet then discover OPEN ADVENTURE through interaction and exploration; not through the rules of the game. Players should never be allowed to read the rules from the game master's rulebook until they are worthy and capable of fulfilling the role of the GM. The excitement and mystery of monsters, aliens and magic could be spoiled if someone reads the game master's rulebook before they are ready.

## Player Roles & Responsibilities
THE MAPPER - The GM describes what the characters can see, smell and hear around them. One player should draw a map according to the game master's descriptions of the surrounding area; that player is called the **Mapper**. One or more PCs should be tasked with drawing a map, though one player must make a real game map (lest the players forget the way their adventurers traveled and become hopelessly lost). The map should be kept at the center of the table so all players can clearly see its layout. Only pencil should be used when drawing the map for easy correction of mistakes or errors in the sketch as the party moves forward on their adventure and the surrounding area is revealed. Eventually, the GM's and players' maps will look more or less alike.

THE CALLER - To avoid confusion and keep the party advancing in their adventure, one player should be elected to speak for the entire party. This player is referred to as the **Caller**. When unusual or certain situations occur each player may want to describe what his or her character is doing. It is the caller's responsibility to insure the player's wishes are being accurately represented and relayed to the GM. The caller does not tell the other players what to do but, rather, the caller merely reports the wishes of the party. The caller is a mediator between the players and the game master and should not judge what the players wish to do.

During combat, things may become confusing. The game master may find it more orderly to talk to each player directly instead of through the caller. Some games may go without a caller, such as when playing with a small number of players, but it is encouraged to have a caller to cultivate camaraderie amongst the party.

THE QUARTERMASTER - One player should be chosen to keep a written record of any equipment, money or treasure that is shared amongst the party. However, individual items that are used only by one character should be tallied and monitored by the player whose character owns the items. Any party or group loot should be noted on a separate piece of paper by the **Quartermaster**. The quartermaster should make sure to keep a detailed record of the amount of each item, the condition or status of the item, the perceived worth or appraisal of any treasure and where each piece of equipment is being stored.

When the GM has created and setup the adventure and the players have created their characters, the game is ready to begin.
